Introduction
The universe and life are complex and understandably so because nature started about 14 billion years back; selecting, discarding, evolving, adding layer upon layer. Science cannot be story told but at the same time the magic of the universe cannot be for the scientific community alone but for everyone on this planet. There is no easy way to explain creation and this blog is written keeping in mind the first-time astronomy-genetics reader with an intent to fascinate and springboard you to the next level of reading on the creator and his creation. I hope you enjoy this blog. 
PS: The posts are sorted, and the latest post will be last (back dated). 

Exploring the intersection of faith and science
If we go back in time to the forests of Africa, we will probably see an ape, our ancestral grandmother, which gave birth to the first human and what a journey it has been for humanity since then. While the first humans probably gazed at the stars in wonder, we have been able to send humans to space and even a spacecraft outside our solar system. We have ambitious plans that every child is born without deformity or inherited genetic defects. While science is about facts, religion is about faith and trust, about the Divine. On 22 October 1996, Pope John Paul II while addressing the Pontifical Academy of Science said that between ancestral apes and modern humans is an 'ontological discontinuity' - a point at which God injected a human soul into an animal lineage. Today we are a people of science, this is the age of genetic revolution, in contrast there has been no great revelations in religion, however religion has stood the test of time with its message of love and compassion, uniting strangers across the globe, propagating the word of God.  
There is a need to find harmony between religion and science. God is the creator; science is his creation and God put a whole lot of science into creation. Albert Einstein once said, “To understand creation is to understand the mind of God.”  
The universe is beautiful, creation is mystical, ever enticing us with the magic of reality and this blog dear reader is an attempt to exemplify the wonder and awe of creation and the creator, from the precise laws of the cosmos to the gene which holds the code of life, this beautiful universe holds many mysteries and wonders, we evolved about 5 million years back and know very little of this vast universe but even that little of what we know is astounding, marvelous and leaves us thirsting for more and that is the legacy we leave behind for every human race to come; the quest to understand God and his design. 

COSMOS 
In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth - Genesis 1:1 
We are made of star stuff – Carl Sagan 
Without a doubt, we are all mesmerized by beauty, be it art, poetry, nature or whatever the eye of the beholder, the universe is one such beauty and is truly amazing. We know that the universe is vast and living things are complex, but it is by understanding the laws of nature that we truly understand the magical universe we live in. The magnitude of creation is breathtaking and hence our humility and belief in an invisible hand, the creator. We now go on a journey to the cosmos and all you will need is your imagination to understand this incredible universe. Humans may be tiny beings, but we stand tall, shoulder to shoulder with the monstrous and celestial objects of the universe and why not? After all we were conceived in the stars, we are made of star stuff. Scientists have been able to derive the laws of the universe just by using their imagination and built incredible equipment to validate their understanding of these laws. Cori Bargmann who was leading the Mark Zuckerberg foundation for medical research said, “It is the greatest feeling in the world to be a scientist” and I can tell you it is the greatest feeling in the world to understand creation.  
The three basic questions that humanity has been asking throughout the ages are:  
Where did we come from? 
Why are we here?  
Now that we are here, where do we go from here?  
And these questions have shaped our beliefs which has led to the basal paradigms of animism (balance of material and spiritual realm), polytheism (belief in many Gods), monotheism (belief in one God) and the present day of scientific materialism. Each of these paradigms have been shaped by a belief in the environment and in God. With knowledge we have evolved from each paradigm, however with knowledge comes power and with power comes ego and man has moved on that path of ego, disregarding the values of the word of God and blindsided by knowledge. The present-day paradigm of materialism too will end someday, and a new one will begin but will this end in revelation, or will it end in destruction is what time will tell. Science is the quest to understand creation while religion is about understanding the philosophy behind creation. While science tries to answer the first question, religions search for answers to the next two questions. As humans we have watched and learnt, and everything we are today we have learnt from the universe. Science tests it’s theories in the universe, it is however not the same with religion, theories and beliefs are borrowed by observing the universe just like science, but religion is a theology, a belief in an omnipotent, omnipresent and an omniscient God. The universe is beautifully balanced, push nature the wrong way and it will unleash a fury to get back to equilibrium, similarly most religions preach about living a balanced life. Going beyond a moral life is the spiritual life, Jesus did not perform miracles because he wanted to have a following or to impress the crowd, this was his way of life. Miracles defy science and scientists have said that miracles go against the very nature of science, meaning did nature bend back laws of science to allow for these miracles? Scientists believe that creation was a random act of nature, that a probability existed, and nature took that chance to create the universe and life. If the birth and existence of something as complex as the universe and life can be explained through probability, then what about the humble placebo effect which has performed unimaginable and unexplained miracles in medical science? and if this is not the work of God then how do you explain these miracles?  
About 13.8 billion years back the universe started with the big bang, about 4.6 billion years back, our sun created gravity pulling particles within its sphere and two tiny particles coalesced together and this was the defining moment for the birth of planet Earth, these particles grew bigger and bigger due to innumerable collisions till we had planet Earth. The story of Earth does not end here like the billions of planets that exist in our universe, Earth was a miniscule planet in one corner of the Milky way galaxy, but this would turn into a special planet, a planet in the Goldilocks zone, a blue planet like no other in the universe. It was not an easy journey for planet Earth, Earth had to endure fire and ice and a fight to death with planet Theia which was hypothesized to be in the same orbit as Earth. About 2 billion years back Earth was filled with microbes, bacteria with hardly enough oxygen to support life. A day on earth would have been around 6 hours, however this collision with planet Theia knocked off a chunk of Earth which resulted in our moon. Tidal friction and interaction with the moon slowed down Earth’s rotation to the present 24 hours and when bacteria were exposed to this continuous light, they generated more oxygen which made it conducive for plant and animal life. 
The process of creation would never be different from what we have observed today. It is not like God waved a wand and created the universe in 6 days and rested on the 7th day. Creation is evolution, continually mutating to adapt to the environment. The objective of the book of Genesis was not on the science of creation but on how we should transform into a better being, about how we would use our consciousness for living a morally good life and setting up a belief system. Genesis is an interpretation of the creator and his creation, interpretation is not an escape word but progressive thinking, an acceptance that with knowledge we need to realign our thinking. Science is progress because scientists have built upon the theories of other scientists. Scientists have continually realigned to newer thinking, newer theories and this is the reason we have progressed phenomenally. Religion must realign and rethink progress, they are too much in the safe harbor of the known, practicing rituals which is simply lip service to God. Religion must keep pace with science step for step otherwise entropy will rule the world and ultimately bring ruin to our beautiful blue planet. Today we are no longer a heart people, we are a mind people; we have learned to question everything and instead of faith and trust we use logic and reasoning, and the church must align to this new strength. 
While religion had a head start with the book of Genesis, scientists have been intrigued by superstitions and beliefs and the book of Genesis has been a hunting ground for scientists. Scientists have been looking back in time through cosmic imprints to understand the birth of the universe. However, starting at the middle of creation and going back to derive creation has been like the crabs which lived at the deep end of a pond, these crabs define all the rules governing the pond until one day the water recedes completely and the crabs are amazed to see an entire new world and they start a whole new theory on creation. This is not to discredit scientists but to state that creation is vast, it is complex and to challenge the existence of God without getting to the roots of creation is widening the chasm between religion and science. That said, scientists have done remarkable work in understanding the universe, when the first humans evolved, there were no libraries or books, our entire learning has been from the universe and Leon Lederman says this beautifully; If the universe is the answer, what is the question?   
Like the tower of Babel, perhaps when we understood the laws of the cosmos or when we first cracked the DNA code, we thought we had built the tower to heaven and we were Gods, but nature has this habit of throwing a spoke in the wheel every time we hit a high thus keeping us on a perpetual hunt. Religion and science drive us, we need the mystery, and it is this challenge of the unknown which invokes the ancestral hunter in us, some hunt the creator and some hunt creation.  

The Garden of Eden
We read in Genesis that God created the universe in seven days and that God created man from dust, but we know from science that it took billions of years for the formation of the universe, that man evolved from apes, and we are a part of nature. The book of Genesis and the parables of Jesus are timeless because they are interpretations with an underlying principle, the medieval church took the meaning literally, they believed that Earth was the center of the universe and with their geocentric view, caused much damage to science and scientists which set back science by hundreds of years. It took the church 350 years and the grace of Pope John Paul the II to absolve Galileo of any wrongs. Two thousand years back Jesus spoke to us in parables but even today we refer to these parables as they are a guiding force, so what are parables? A parable is a story, a direction, an indication, a parable is not to be taken by its literal meaning, or you will miss the point. If you have ever tried to explain light to a blind man, you will know that it is impossible to do that and that is why we tell this blind man a story, we tell him about sunrise and sunset, day and night, now this blind man will understand that there is something called light and it is beautiful, but he must open his eyes to experience light, similarly, Jesus was telling us about the kingdom of heaven and the kingdom of heaven cannot be explained in earthly terms, we now understand that there is a kingdom of heaven and it is beautiful but we must experience it to know what it is. Parables are stories in the language of the blind.   
God created the heavens and the Earth which means the universe had a start point which is the big bang. What was before the big bang we do not know, we just know that the universe started from a point as minute as an atom which exploded to form the universe. God created Earth which is the Garden of Eden and then God created a variety of plants and animals so that every gene and every methylation could be tested for its function. Nature perfected creation in terms of multiplication and adapting to the environment and from this vast pool of nature, God selected the design for humanity. God created man from dust and in his own image, however the image is more than physical, we depict God as an elderly person with a white beard in heaven, but it is more than a physical image that Genesis refers to, Jesus refers to himself as the son of man and to God as his father which means a human form with a divinity.  
The story of the Garden of Eden is beautiful and meaningful. In the Garden of Eden, God laid down rules for Adam and Eve to follow which means there are laws by which the universe works, we are a part of nature, and we must obey these laws of nature for a life of fulfilment and happiness. The devil is our consciousness and scientist Richard Dawkins describes genes as the selfish gene because genes will do anything to survive and multiply. While religion believes that consciousness is a gift from God to differentiate us as a species, scientists believes that consciousness is an ability by which we can visualize, simulate and prepare for danger. The dinosaurs could not survive an asteroid hit, and we may or may not, but we are better prepared than the dinosaurs.  
In the Garden of Eden, the devil tempted Adam and Eve with illusions, that they could also be as powerful as God. Illusions are temptations and a misuse of our powers of consciousness. Animals are instinctive and this is required for survival and since we evolved from apes, our body will respond to situations in a similar way as animals, however consciousness allows us to evaluate our responses and, in most cases, it is to say no to these responses which the body has already taken, or in other words we do not react, but we become proactive. When Adam and Eve realized they had been tricked by the devil and had disobeyed God they felt ashamed and covered themselves with leaves to hide from their shame and this is the first sin, the sin of shame that Genesis warns us about. The universe is huge, unimaginably huge and the universe has no center, each one of us we are a center in the universe and make no mistake that when we break the laws of nature, we will realize that the universe is omnipresent, Adam and Eve realized that in their shame, there was nowhere they could hide because the universe is all present and is omniscient or all knowing.   
The second lesson this beautiful story teaches us is about responsibility, when God asked Adam why he ate the fruit from the knowledge tree, Adam blamed Eve and Eve blamed the serpent, they did not take responsibility for their actions which resulted in the first sin because of which we are all born of sin. To take an example, when a plague struck the Roman Empire, the Catholics were going around and doing what best they could to support the affected people, the people were amazed at the love and compassion these Catholics showed and many converted to Christianity.  You can see here that one act of kindness and one convert means an entire lineage of Christians. The story of Adam and Eve is a story of disobedience, of going against the laws of nature. It is not like we have one life so we can do what we want because every decision we make may affect an entire lineage. Victor Frankl in his book Man's quest for meaning describes responsibility as two words, response and ability, between thought and action is a pause during which time we have the ability to choose our response. To use our consciousness is to be proactive, and by being proactive, we can take responsibility for our actions.    
Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes to 24 in apes, it is not that we have one less but that two chromosomes are fused together in humans, we share about 98% DNA with apes, but the similarity ends there. Consciousness is not a physical thing as it cannot be explained through the nuts and bolts of matter and genes and at the same time nature needed the physical tools to create life forms. Life starts with one tiny, microscopic cell with 23 pairs of chromosomes and about twenty-five thousand genes, that’s it, no architect, no boss, no supervisor no nothing, and this cell evolves into a beautiful living being and that is the God design for you.   

Evolution and Entropy
The story of Noah signifies that God did not want evil to spread, evil is decay, destruction, entropy. Evolution is love, it is compassion, kindness and joy, evolution is Godliness. When we talk about good and evil, we talk about evolution and entropy, evolution is everything which goes in harmony with nature and evil is everything which goes against the laws of nature like greed, passion, lust, gluttony, addiction, or anything which degrades evolution and leads to physical decay or entropy. Religions have identified with good and evil, and two kinds of religions emerged in the world: the heart religion and the mind religion. Christians, Hindus, Mohammads, Jews, etc. follow the religion of the heart, where it is believed that we must be passionate about God, euphoric about God so much so that we dissolve ourselves in God. The word sin has a beautiful meaning, it means to have missed the target, to have veered off the right path and we have sinned when God is not the center of our universe. The goal of this religion is the Kingdom of Heaven, Moksha, a state of bliss through truth. The mind religion is a logical religion and followed by Buddhists and Jains. Here it is believed that the mind is the cause of all evil as the mind is either in the past (problems) or future (dreams) but never in the present. Present means gift and when you live life in the present, life becomes a gift. The goal of this religion is enlightenment.   
Today we live in a world of science and thanks to science we have a good understanding of how the mind and body work. For example, if you look at the first time you learnt to drive a car, you had the gear shift, the clutch, brake, accelerator and a host of other controls to move and control the car. The first time you learn to drive a car, the brain takes enormous amount of energy, and the body cannot afford to supply this energy to the brain every time you drive a car and hence the brain learns any complex task you may teach it. But unfortunately, the brain does not distinguish between good or bad but just to master a task. Take the case of road rage, the brain can become aware much before you do that a condition exists for anger and it gets the body ready for you to unleash anger and when we react, we give in to the raw power of genes and that makes us no different from the animals from which we evolved. It is not a degradation but the missed opportunity to use our consciousness and to be human.   
If you believe in God, then you must believe that God created the universe. Science is not a law unto itself or an invention of scientists but a means to decode creation. Just as religion is the word of God, creation is his science, and we must embrace science just as we embrace religion. As scientists unravel the mysteries of this universe we see more and more of this magical and mystical universe we live in and just as we have used science to better our living conditions, so also must we use the discoveries of science to get us closer to the creator. As you will see, creation is sheer awe and the love you will have for creation and the creator will be a different kind of love, a spontaneous love like nothing else.   
 

The Big Bang
In the beginning there was a nothingness; no sound, no light, no matter no nothing, just a big formless void and from this void God created the heavens and the earth. Scientists propose that the universe began from the Big Bang, that microscopic particles known as electrons, protons and neutrons filled the universe, the universe cooled, condensed and stars, planets, solar systems, galaxies and other celestial bodies were formed. It is just like drops of water can make an ocean so also this universe and all celestial bodies can be broken down into tiny, microscopic atoms. And then came life made up of microscopic cells, our body is made up of about 50 to 60 trillion cells. Scientists propose that the universe and life was a random act of nature, that conditions prevailed and the universe and life synthesized. Nature is not local to our planet, but it is the universe itself and if nature created life on Earth, and if nature has the blueprint for creating life forms, then why only Earth and why not other planets? Genesis however tells us that creation has a creator which is God, Genesis describes man as the final creation of God, there has been no more evolution or branches to homo sapiens since we evolved five million years back.   
Today evolution is controlled by humans, we eat what we want and grow what we want, healthcare is available to everyone, we have shrunk forests and polluted the air and water causing serious damage to plant and animal life, there are no more variations, and neither is there a choice to select that which is best suited to survive in this world, the human race is that choice, we are the greatest predators and we decide what we want or do not want. It is written in Genesis that Earth is the garden of Eden where life started and humans are the final entity of creation, maybe someday in the future we would find habitable planets and there will be variations to life forms to adapt to these environments, but the words of Genesis are there for all to see, that God is the creator and the universe and all things in it are his creation. The universe and creation have a unique signature, a oneness, it is not like the universe and life forms were designed by many architects, the fundamental particles and genes are the building blocks of the universe and a parallel. Einstein was obsessed with a unification theory to relativity and quantum mechanics for he believed in a oneness to creation. The search for Genesis 2.0 is ever on and if we do find another life form, you can be assured that it will not be different from what we see on Earth but an adaptation because the creator is one and all of creation are his.   
To understand the big bang, let us do a rewind of the universe from its present state, if we start to condense the universe with its billions upon billions of stars and galaxies and planets and black holes, we can reduce it to a tiny, microscopic atom and the laws of physics as we know it still works to this level of time interval which is 10^-36 seconds after the big bang or 1 divided by 1 followed by 36 zeros of a second!! Beyond this time is the abracadabra nanoseconds when the magical pot of creation was churned with subatomic particles and forces known today as quantum mechanics and then the universe expanded. When the universe expanded, there were so many crucial factors, example matter and antimatter were not of equal parts, if they were, they would have annihilated each other and the result would have been radiation but instead matter and antimatter was asymmetrical resulting in the possibility of all cosmic objects, how was this asymmetry caused if not by celestial intervention? probability?    
Second is the absolute precision in terms of rate of expansion of the universe, if the universe had expanded too slow, then gravity would have pulled everything inside and the universe would have collapsed onto itself, too fast and there would not have been stars, planets and galaxies, the precise rate of expansion coupled with the right amount of matter which existed resulted in the universe we are in today. The events are too precise to assume randomness instead of design, the expansion rate, gravity and many such constants have made it possible for the universe we are in today. Then there are the subatomic particles, the strong and weak forces that exist at the level of atoms which are crucial for the formation of larger atoms and molecules.   
It was like the creator had thought up his creation; he designed the universe, the many different galaxies, solar systems and even our tiny planet Earth. Then he defined the laws of physics which would make life possible on Earth. He packed it all up, compressed it to atomic proportion and let creation take over. Scientists will never agree that the blueprint for the universe was available on atomic scale. Give a scientist a seed and he will dissect it and tell you everything about the seed except that a tree will come out of the seed, and this is science because science cannot identify with an objective to creation, only religion can do that and unfortunately science and religion do not see eye to eye, they disregard each other instead of working together, we need the wisdom of Genesis if we are to progress with the knowledge of science. Religion must be assertive and talk objectives in the language of science for we have come to a point of progress where we need to go beyond morals and ethics, beyond love and compassion. We need to go deeper to explore the gift of consciousness, to give reason for the existence of the cosmos and to work with science.   

Georges Lemaître - The father of the big bang theory
The theory of the Big Bang was proposed by Georges Lemaitre a Belgian priest. Lemaitre was born in 1894 to devout Roman Catholic parents and at the young age of nine, expressed his wish to become a priest. Georges was a cheerful boy and excelled in mathematics and physics. It is said that there are three main branches in science; mathematics, physics and chemistry and everything else is variations to these three fundamental bases. Chemists answer only to physicists, physicists to mathematicians and mathematicians to God for mathematics is the language of God. Georges was equally devoted to God as to science and this was a rarity, for scientists did not show much patience to religion and religions just a passing interest in science. In July 1914, World War I broke out with Germany invading Belgium and France, Georges and his brother Jacques enrolled in the army and were on the front line fighting the war. Whenever there was a break in fighting and gun firing, Georges would pull out his physics book and start reading, something his fellow soldiers found very amusing. Georges and his brother survived the war, and he was awarded the Croix de guerre medal for bravery. He would have become an artillery officer but was expelled from training after telling an instructor that his ballistics calculations were wrong! With the war behind him, Georges followed up on his childhood dream of becoming a priest and began training for the Roman catholic priesthood. He was ordained a priest in September 1923 at the age of 29. Georges however continued his studies in science.  
 Cosmological constant 
Einstein had proposed that the universe is static but when he applied his theory to the model of the universe, the outcome was an unstable universe, indicating that the universe was either expanding or contracting and to solve this problem, Einstein introduced a cosmological constant. Georges while studying Einstein’s equation, did his own observations and proposed his theory of an expanding universe, not only that, but he also went a step further and said that if the universe is in expansion, it must have started from some initial point. Scientists were not comfortable about the idea that the universe started from some initial point, for a universe with a beginning meant that creation had a creator. Fred Hoyle another scientist sarcastically coined the term Big Bang, and it stuck.   
During the first fraction of a second of the big bang, the universe would have been filled with matter and antimatter, example the positively charged positron is the antimatter for the negatively charged electron, matter and antimatter are created in pairs but today all that we see in the visible universe is made up of matter and what happened to antimatter? If matter and antimatter had been created in equal parts, they would have annihilated each other when they came in contact leaving behind energy or radiation, but some unknown entity intervened in the early process and one particle per billion survived and the result is the universe we live in. This asymmetry of matter and antimatter is a mystery in physics.  
 Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) 
In 1948, Ralph Amer working with Robert Herman and George Gamow on the big bang theory proposed that had there been a big bang then the annihilation of matter and antimatter would have left behind radiation, an afterglow and called it the cosmic microwave background or CMB. In 1965 researchers Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson of Bell Labs were studying signals from the Milky Way Galaxy, however their radio receiver was picking up a lot of noise, thinking it to be from the pigeon droppings on their antenna, they cleaned it up and chased off the pigeons but still the noise persisted, and it was then that they realized this was not noise but actual signals from space or the cosmic microwave background signals. It was later in 1929 that Edwin Hubble through his powerful telescopes and light shift theories discovered that the universe was expanding, which forced Einstein to discard the cosmological constant stating that it was the greatest blunder in his life. The theory Of Georges Lemaitre was proved right, that the universe started from atomic scale with the big bang and that the universe is in expansion.  
Lemaitre's theory of the big bang is iconic, and we are in the right direction in understanding the birth of the universe. Perhaps the best tribute to Father Lemaitre was that made by a visiting professor of Physics at the Catholic University of America. In 1933, Rev. Vecchiarello, O.F.M. said: It is a point of great interest nowadays, when there is so much loose thinking and still looser writing and talking about the non-existence of God, of the immortal soul, and of a host of eternal verities, to see a man who is both a priest and a scientist fraternizing on the most intimate terms with the world’s most illustrious scientific geniuses. He not only associates with them, but he is their peer; and in that is the lie given to the old and empty charge that the study of science means the loss of belief in religion. Lemaitre, of course, is usually an object of great curiosity – not so much to his co-religionists as to many not of the Faith who marvel at the ‘phenomenon’ of a Catholic priest being a scientist, yes, not only a scientist of the regular run, but a genius whose theories are most daring.  

The Standard Model of the universe 
Sometime in 1970s, scientists came up with the standard model of the universe, the universe is filled with particles and forces zipping around at the speed of light and colluding together to create a magical universe. We needed a model to explain the working of the universe to make sense of all these forces and particles and laws. For example, imagine a library strewn with reams of pages and to bring order to the library we will collect these pages and make them into books, next we will categorize these books by authors and genre now we have some semblance of order. Similarly, scientists came up with the standard model of the universe which is defined at a high level with about a dozen particles and less than half a dozen forces. We know that the universe works and hence assumptions were made in designing the model. Feed data into the model and you will get the same output behavior as in the universe and everyone was happy. However, the standard model does not consider gravity, dark matter and energy and subatomic particles and with the discovery of new particle and forces, the model is refined to make it more realistic, and the hope is that we would eventually have a model which replicates the reality of the universe. In the beginning the hunt for new particles was easy work as the universe was virgin and we were able to find many particles but as we got deeper and deeper it is becoming hard to find new particles with the last one being the Higgs Boson discovered at CERN’s Large Hadron Collider and that was almost 10 years back. The LHC is located near the France, Switzerland border and the particle accelerator tunnel runs 127 kilometers long and 100 meters underground. The LHC is designed to replicate the big bang event, at which time, subatomic particles colluded to form bigger particles. The hope is that by smashing together particles, we would be able to produce all the particles that were there during the big bang. Hydrogen atoms are first striped of electrons and the remaining protons are fired at each other. The superconducting magnets accelerate these protons to near the speed of light. Any particle which has mass cannot reach the speed of light, the greater the particle speed, the greater will its mass become and at the speed of light its mass will be infinite which would make it impossible to move it, with the exception of photons or light particles which travel at 186282 m/sec and this is because photons have no mass. When protons collide at close to the speed of light, they will decay and from this decay can be seen other subatomic particles. The work at CERN’s LHC is done and there are no more findings, it’s time to move on and the next big collider which is expected in China and hopefully we will find more particles. But why spend billions of dollars building colliders in the hope of finding these fundamental particles? Why are they important to us? To answer these questions, we go back in time to understand the many discoveries, the great scientists, the role of the medieval church and many such thing, to weave a story which is more fascinating than any science fiction movie you would have ever seen.   

The journey of science
We will walk through the many scientists who contributed 

Aristotle
He set the stage for a geocentric universe

Coppernicus and Galileo
disproved Aristotle's theory

Isaac Newton
How we see Newton's laws in our daily lives long after he is gone

Albert Einstein
The greatest scientist to have lived

Sun
A huge ball of hydrogen and helium atoms

The Milky way Galaxy
one among the billions of galaxies in the universe

Dark Matter and Energy
We cannot see them and dark matter pushes the universe to expansion 

Quantum Mechanics
Truly difficult subject and includes consciousness

Global Warming
A must read






