Blog
If we go back in time to the forests of Africa, we will probably see an ape, our ancestral grandmother, which gave birth to the first human and what a journey it has been for humanity since then. While the first humans probably gazed at the stars in wonder, we have been able to send humans to space and even a spacecraft outside our solar system. We have ambitious plans that every child is born without deformity or inherited genetic defects. While science is about facts, religion is about faith and trust, about the Divine. On October 22, 1996, while addressing the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, Pope John Paul II  explained that between apes and humans is an ontological discontinuity which runs counter to physical continuity. The moment of transition from physical - which is the field of science, to the spiritual cannot be the object of scientific observation but the experience of metaphysical knowledge, of self-awareness and self-reflection, of moral conscience, and falls within the competence of theology which brings out the meaning according to the Creator's plan. 

Today we are a people of science, this is the age of genetic revolution, in contrast there has been no great revelations in religion, however religion has stood the test of time with its message of love and compassion, uniting strangers across the globe, propagating the word of God.  

There is a need to find harmony between religion and science. God is the creator; science is his creation and God put a whole lot of science into creation. Albert Einstein often reflected on the relationship between science and faith, once stating that understanding the universe was a way to understand the 'the thoughts of God.' 

The universe is beautiful, creation is mystical, enticing us with the magic of reality and this blog, dear reader, is an attempt to reflect on the wonder and awe of both creation and the Creator. From the precise laws governing the cosmos to the genetic code that defines life, the universe holds endless mysteries and wonders. Humans evolved around 5 million years ago, and our understanding of the cosmos is limited, yet even the little of what we know is astounding, marvelous and leaves us thirsting for more and this is the legacy we leave behind for every generation to come; the quest to understand God’s design. 

Cosmos
Without a doubt, we are all mesmerized by beauty, be it art, poetry, nature or whatever the eye of the beholder, the universe is one such beauty and is truly amazing. We know that the universe is vast and living things are complex, but it is by understanding the laws of nature that we truly understand the magical universe we live in. The magnitude of creation is breathtaking and hence our humility and belief in an invisible hand, the creator. We now go on a journey to the cosmos and all you will need is your imagination to understand this incredible universe. Humans may be tiny beings, but we stand tall, shoulder to shoulder with the monstrous and celestial objects of the universe and why not? After all we were conceived in the stars, we are made of star stuff as Carl Sagan famously remarked. Scientists have been able to derive the laws of the universe just by using their imagination and built incredible equipment to validate their understanding of these laws. The three basic questions that humanity has been asking throughout the ages are:  

Where did we come from? 
Why are we here?  
Now that we are here, where do we go from here?  

And these questions have shaped our beliefs which has led to the basal paradigms of animism (balance of material and spiritual realm), polytheism (belief in many Gods), monotheism (belief in one God) and the present day of scientific materialism. Each of these paradigms have been shaped by a belief in the environment and in God. With knowledge we have evolved from each paradigm, however with knowledge comes power and with power comes ego and man has moved on that path of ego, disregarding the values of the word of God and blindsided by knowledge. The present-day paradigm of materialism too will end someday, and a new one will begin but will this end in revelation, or will it end in destruction is what time will tell. Science is the quest to understand creation while religion is about understanding the philosophy behind creation. While science tries to answer the first question, religions search for answers to the next two questions. As humans we have watched and learnt, and everything we are today we have learnt from the universe. Science tests its theories in the universe, it is however not the same with religion, theories and beliefs are borrowed by observing the universe just like science, but religion is a theology, a belief in an omnipotent, omnipresent and an omniscient God. The universe is beautifully balanced, push nature the wrong way and it will unleash a fury to get back to equilibrium, similarly most religions preach about living a balanced life. Going beyond a moral life is the spiritual life, Jesus did not perform miracles because he wanted to have a following or to impress the crowd, this was his way of life. Miracles defy science and scientists have said that miracles go against the very nature of science, meaning did nature bend back laws of science to allow for these miracles? Scientists believe that creation was a random act of nature, that a probability existed, and nature took that chance to create the universe and life. If the birth and existence of something as complex as the universe and life can be explained through probability, then what about the humble placebo effect which has performed unimaginable and unexplained miracles in medical science? and if this is not the work of God then how do you explain these miracles?  

About 13.8 billion years ago the universe started with the Big Bang, approximately 4.6 billion years ago, the Sun's gravitational pull caused particles to coalesce, leading to the formation of Earth through countless collisions. The story of Earth does not end here like the billions of planets that exist in our universe, Earth was a miniscule planet in one corner of the Milky way galaxy, but this would turn into a special planet, a planet in the Goldilocks zone, a blue planet like no other in the universe. It was not an easy journey for planet Earth, Earth had to endure fire and ice and a fight to death with planet Theia which was hypothesized to be in the same orbit as Earth. About 2 billion years back Earth was filled with microbes, bacteria with hardly enough oxygen to support life. A day on earth would have been around 6 hours, however a celestial body named Theia collided with the early Earth (prevailing theory), and the debris from this impact coalesced to form the Moon. Tidal friction and interaction with the moon slowed down Earth’s rotation to the present 24 hours and when bacteria were exposed to this continuous light, they generated more oxygen which made it conducive for plant and animal life. 

The process of creation would never be different from what we have observed today. It is not like God waved a wand and created the universe in 6 days and rested on the 7th day. Creation is evolution, continually mutating to adapt to the environment. The objective of the book of Genesis was not on the science of creation but on how we should transform into a better being, about how we would use our consciousness for living a morally good life and setting up a belief system. Genesis is an interpretation of the creator and his creation, interpretation is not an escape word but progressive thinking, an acceptance that with knowledge we need to realign our thinking. Science is progress because scientists have built upon the theories of other scientists. Scientists have continually realigned to newer thinking, newer theories and this is the reason we have progressed phenomenally. Religion must realign and rethink progress, they are too much in the safe harbor of the known, practicing rituals which is simply lip service to God. Religion must keep pace with science step for step otherwise entropy will rule the world and ultimately bring ruin to our beautiful blue planet. Today we are no longer a heart people, we are a mind people; we have learned to question everything and instead of faith and trust we use logic and reasoning, and the church must align to this new strength. 

While religion had a head start with the book of Genesis, scientists have been intrigued by superstitions and beliefs and the book of Genesis has been a hunting ground for scientists. Scientists have been looking back in time through cosmic imprints to understand the birth of the universe. However, starting at the middle of creation and going back to derive creation has been like the crabs which lived at the deep end of a pond, these crabs define all the rules governing the pond until one day the water recedes completely and the crabs are amazed to see an entire new world and they start a whole new theory on creation. This is not to discredit scientists but to state that creation is vast, it is complex and to challenge the existence of God without getting to the roots of creation is widening the chasm between religion and science. That said, scientists have done remarkable work in understanding the universe, when the first humans evolved, there were no libraries or books, our entire learning has been from the universe and Leon Lederman says this beautifully; If the universe is the answer, what is the question?   

Like the tower of Babel, perhaps when we understood the laws of the cosmos or when we first cracked the DNA code, we thought we had built the tower to heaven and we were Gods, but nature has this habit of throwing a spoke in the wheel every time we hit a high thus keeping us on a perpetual hunt. Religion and science drive us, we need the mystery, and it is this challenge of the unknown which invokes the ancestral hunter in us, some hunt the creator and some hunt creation. 

The Garden of Eden
We read in Genesis that God created the universe in seven days and that God created man from dust, but we know from science that it took billions of years for the formation of the universe, that man evolved from apes, and we are a part of nature. The book of Genesis and the parables of Jesus are timeless because they are interpretations with an underlying principle, the medieval church took the meaning literally, they believed that Earth was the center of the universe and with their geocentric view, caused much damage to science and scientists which set back science by hundreds of years. It took the church 350 years and the grace of Pope John Paul the II to absolve Galileo of any wrongs. Two thousand years back Jesus spoke to us in parables but even today we refer to these parables as they are a guiding force, so what are parables? A parable is a story, a direction, an indication, a parable is not to be taken by its literal meaning, or you will miss the point. If you have ever tried to explain light to a blind man, you will know that it is impossible to do that and that is why we tell this blind man a story, we tell him about sunrise and sunset, day and night, now this blind man will understand that there is something called light and it is beautiful, but he must open his eyes to experience light, similarly, Jesus was telling us about the kingdom of heaven and the kingdom of heaven cannot be explained in earthly terms, we now understand that there is a kingdom of heaven and it is beautiful but we must experience it to know what it is. Parables are stories in the language of the blind.   

God created the heavens and the Earth which means the universe had a start point which is the big bang. What was before the big bang we do not know, we just know that the universe started from a point as minute as an atom which exploded to form the universe. God created Earth which is the Garden of Eden and then God created a variety of plants and animals so that every gene and every methylation could be tested for its function. Nature perfected creation in terms of multiplication and adapting to the environment and from this vast pool of nature, God selected the design for humanity. God created man from dust and in his own image, however the image is more than physical, we depict God as an elderly person with a white beard in heaven, but it is more than a physical image that Genesis refers to, Jesus refers to himself as the son of man and to God as his father which means a human form with a divinity.  

The story of the Garden of Eden is beautiful and meaningful. In the Garden of Eden, God laid down rules for Adam and Eve to follow which means there are laws by which the universe works, we are a part of nature, and we must obey these laws of nature for a life of fulfilment and happiness. The devil is our consciousness and scientist Richard Dawkins describes genes as the selfish gene because genes will do anything to survive and multiply. While religion believes that consciousness is a gift from God to differentiate us as a species, scientists believes that consciousness is an ability by which we can visualize, simulate and prepare for danger. The dinosaurs could not survive an asteroid hit, and we may or may not, but we are better prepared than the dinosaurs because of consciousness.

In the Garden of Eden, the devil tempted Adam and Eve with illusions, that they could also be as powerful as God. Illusions are temptations and a misuse of our powers of consciousness. Animals are instinctive and this is required for survival and since we evolved from apes, our body will respond to situations in a similar way as animals, however consciousness allows us to evaluate our responses and, in most cases, it is to say no to these responses which the body has already taken, or in other words we do not react, but we become proactive. When Adam and Eve realized they had been tricked by the devil and had disobeyed God they felt ashamed and covered themselves with leaves to hide from their shame and this is the first sin, the sin of shame that Genesis warns us about. The universe is huge, unimaginably huge and the universe has no center, each one of us we are a center in the universe and make no mistake that when we break the laws of nature, we will realize that the universe is omnipresent, Adam and Eve realized that in their shame, there was nowhere they could hide because the universe is all present and is omniscient or all knowing.   

The second lesson this beautiful story teaches us is about responsibility, when God asked Adam why he ate the fruit from the knowledge tree, Adam blamed Eve and Eve blamed the serpent, they did not take responsibility for their actions which resulted in the first sin because of which we are all born of sin. To take an example, when a plague struck the Roman Empire, the Catholics were going around and doing what best they could to support the affected people, the people were amazed at the love and compassion these Catholics showed and many converted to Christianity.  You can see here that one act of kindness and one convert means an entire lineage of Christians. The story of Adam and Eve is a story of disobedience, of going against the laws of nature. It is not like we have one life so we can do what we want because every decision we make may affect an entire lineage. Victor Frankl in his book Man's quest for meaning describes responsibility as two words, response and ability, between thought and action is a pause during which time we have the ability to choose our response. To use our consciousness is to be proactive, and by being proactive, we take responsibility for our actions.    

Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes to 24 in apes, it is not that we have one less but that two chromosomes are fused together in humans, we share about 98% DNA with apes, but the similarity ends there. Consciousness is not a physical thing as it cannot be explained through the nuts and bolts of matter and genes and at the same time nature needed the physical tools to create life forms. Life starts with one tiny, microscopic cell with 23 pairs of chromosomes and about twenty-five thousand genes, that’s it, no architect, no boss, no supervisor no nothing, and this cell evolves into a beautiful living being and that is the God design for you.

Evolution and Entropy
The story of Noah signifies that God did not want evil to spread, evil is decay, destruction, entropy. Evolution is love, it is compassion, kindness and joy, evolution is Godliness. When we talk about good and evil, we talk about evolution and entropy, evolution is everything which goes in harmony with nature and evil is everything which goes against the laws of nature like greed, passion, lust, gluttony, addiction, or anything which degrades evolution and leads to physical decay or entropy. Religions have identified with good and evil, and two kinds of religions emerged in the world: the heart religion and the mind religion. Christians, Hindus, Mohammads, Jews, etc. follow the religion of the heart, where it is believed that we must be passionate about God, euphoric about God so much so that we dissolve ourselves in God. The word sin has a beautiful meaning, it means to have missed the target, to have veered off the right path and we have sinned when God is not the center of our universe. The goal of this religion is the Kingdom of Heaven, Moksha, a state of bliss through truth. The mind religion is a logical religion and followed by Buddhists and Jains. Here it is believed that the mind is the cause of all evil as the mind is either in the past (problems) or future (dreams) but never in the present. Present means gift and when you live life in the present, life becomes a gift. The goal of this religion is enlightenment.   

Today we live in a world of science and thanks to science we have a good understanding of how the mind and body work. For example, if you look at the first time you learnt to drive a car, you had the gear shift, the clutch, brake, accelerator and a host of other controls to move and control the car. The first time you learn to drive a car, the brain takes enormous amount of energy, and the body cannot afford to supply this energy to the brain every time you drive a car and hence the brain learns any complex task you may teach it. But unfortunately, the brain does not distinguish between good or bad but just to master a task. Take the case of road rage, the brain can become aware much before you do that a condition exists for anger and it gets the body ready for you to unleash anger and when we react, we give in to the raw power of genes and that makes us no different from the animals from which we evolved. It is not a degradation but the missed opportunity to use our consciousness and to be human.   

If you believe in God, then you must believe that God created the universe. Science is not a law unto itself or an invention of scientists but a means to decode creation. Just as religion is the word of God, creation is his science, and we must embrace science just as we embrace religion. As scientists unravel the mysteries of this universe we see more and more of this magical and mystical universe we live in and just as we have used science to better our living conditions, so also must we use the discoveries of science to get us closer to the Creator. As you will see, creation is sheer awe and the love you will have for creation and the Creator will be a different kind of love, a spontaneous love like nothing else.   

The Big Bang
In the beginning there was a nothingness; no sound, no light, no matter no nothing, just a big formless void and from this void God created the heavens and the earth. Scientists propose that the universe began from the Big Bang, that microscopic particles known as electrons, protons and neutrons filled the universe, the universe cooled, condensed and stars, planets, solar systems, galaxies and other celestial bodies were formed. It is just like drops of water can make an ocean so also this universe and all celestial bodies can be broken down into tiny, microscopic atoms. And then came life made up of microscopic cells, our body is made up of about 50 to 60 trillion cells. Scientists propose that the universe and life was a random act of nature, that conditions prevailed and the universe and life synthesized. Nature is not local to our planet, but it is the universe itself and if nature created life on Earth, and if nature has the blueprint for creating life forms, then why only Earth and why not other planets? Genesis however tells us that creation has a creator which is God, Genesis describes man as the final creation of God, there has been no more evolution or branches to homo sapiens since we evolved five million years back.   

Today evolution is controlled by humans, we eat what we want and grow what we want, healthcare is available to everyone, we have shrunk forests and polluted the air and water causing serious damage to plant and animal life, there are no more variations, and neither is there a choice to select that which is best suited to survive in this world, the human race is that choice, we are the greatest predators and we decide what we want or do not want. It is written in Genesis that Earth is the garden of Eden where life started and humans are the final entity of creation, maybe someday in the future we would find habitable planets and there will be variations to life forms to adapt to these environments, but the words of Genesis are there for all to see, that God is the creator and the universe and all things in it are his creation. The universe and creation have a unique signature, a oneness, it is not like the universe and life forms were designed by many architects, the fundamental particles and genes are the building blocks of the universe and a parallel. Einstein was obsessed with a unification theory to relativity and quantum mechanics for he believed in a oneness to creation. The search for Genesis 2.0 is ever on and if we do find another life form, you can be assured that it will not be different from what we see on Earth but an adaptation because the creator is one and all of creation are his.   

To understand the big bang, let us do a rewind of the universe from its present state, if we start to condense the universe with its billions upon billions of stars and galaxies and planets and black holes, we can reduce it to a tiny, microscopic atom and the laws of physics as we know it still works to this level of time interval which is 10^-36 seconds after the big bang or 1 divided by 1 followed by 36 zeros of a second!! Beyond this time is the abracadabra nanoseconds when the magical pot of creation was churned with subatomic particles and forces known today as quantum mechanics and then the universe expanded. When the universe expanded, there were so many crucial factors, example matter and antimatter were not of equal parts, if they were, they would have annihilated each other and the result would have been radiation but instead matter and antimatter was asymmetrical resulting in the possibility of all cosmic objects, how was this asymmetry caused if not by celestial intervention? probability?    
                                  
Second is the absolute precision in terms of rate of expansion of the universe, if the universe had expanded too slow, then gravity would have pulled everything inside and the universe would have collapsed onto itself, too fast and there would not have been stars, planets and galaxies, the precise rate of expansion coupled with the right amount of matter which existed resulted in the universe we are in today. The events are too precise to assume randomness instead of design, the expansion rate, gravity and many such constants have made it possible for the universe we are in today. Then there are the subatomic particles, the strong and weak forces that exist at the level of atoms which are crucial for the formation of larger atoms and molecules.   
It was like the creator had thought up his creation; he designed the universe, the many different galaxies, solar systems and even our tiny planet Earth. Then he defined the laws of physics which would make life possible on Earth. He packed it all up, compressed it to atomic proportion and let creation take over. Scientists will never agree that the blueprint for the universe was available on atomic scale. Give a scientist a seed and he will dissect it and tell you everything about the seed except that a tree will come out of the seed, and this is science because science cannot identify with an objective to creation, only religion can do that and unfortunately science and religion do not see eye to eye, they disregard each other instead of working together, we need the wisdom of Genesis if we are to progress with the knowledge of science. Religion must be assertive and talk objectives in the language of science for we have come to a point of progress where we need to go beyond morals and ethics, beyond love and compassion. We need to go deeper to explore the gift of consciousness, to give reason for the existence of the cosmos and to work with science.   

Georges Lemaitre
The theory of the Big Bang was proposed by Georges Lemaitre a Belgian priest. Lemaitre was born in 1894 to devout Roman Catholic parents and at the young age of nine, expressed his wish to become a priest. 
Einstein had proposed that the universe is static but when he applied his theory to the model of the universe, the outcome was an unstable universe, indicating that the universe was either expanding or contracting and to solve this problem, Einstein introduced a cosmological constant. Georges while studying Einstein’s equation, did his own observations and proposed his theory of an expanding universe, not only that, but he also went a step further and said that if the universe is in expansion, it must have started from some initial point. Scientists were not comfortable about the idea that the universe started from some initial point, for a universe with a beginning meant that creation had a creator. Fred Hoyle another scientist sarcastically coined the term Big Bang, and it stuck.   

In 1948, Ralph Amer working with Robert Herman and George Gamow on the big bang theory proposed that had there been a big bang then the annihilation of matter and antimatter would have left behind radiation, an afterglow and called it the cosmic microwave background or CMB. In 1965 researchers Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson of Bell Labs were studying signals from the Milky Way Galaxy, however their radio receiver was picking up a lot of noise, thinking it to be from the pigeon droppings on their antenna, they cleaned it up and chased off the pigeons but still the noise persisted, and it was then that they realized this was not noise but actual signals from space or the cosmic microwave background signals. It was later in 1929 that Edwin Hubble through his powerful telescopes and light shift theories discovered that the universe was expanding, which forced Einstein to discard the cosmological constant stating that it was the greatest blunder in his life. The theory Of Georges Lemaitre was proved right, that the universe started from atomic scale with the big bang and that the universe is in expansion.  

Standard Model
Sometime in 1970s, scientists came up with the standard model of the universe, the universe is filled with particles and forces zipping around at the speed of light and colluding together to create a magical universe. We needed a model to explain the working of the universe to make sense of all these forces and particles and laws. For example, imagine a library strewn with reams of pages and to bring order to the library we will collect these pages and make them into books, next we will categorize these books by authors and genre now we have some semblance of order. Similarly, scientists came up with the standard model of the universe which is defined at a high level with about a dozen particles and less than half a dozen forces. We know that the universe works and hence assumptions were made in designing the model. Feed data into the model and you will get the same output behavior as in the universe and everyone was happy. However, the standard model does not consider gravity, dark matter and energy and subatomic particles and with the discovery of new particle and forces, the model is refined to make it more realistic, and the hope is that we would eventually have a model which replicates the reality of the universe. 

Democritus 
We now travel back in time to 460 BC to a city called Abdera in Greece to meet our first famous scientist Democritus. Democritus was a truly awesome philosopher of his times, a time when man was gazing at the stars in wonder and trying to make sense of the fickleness of nature in terms of floods, droughts, and sickness which they attributed to the anger of different gods, when superstition and witchcraft was rampant, and here was a man who derived the atom!!  At that time there were no measurements or instruments, they were philosophers who discussed, debated and argued their theories with other philosophers most probably till the beer ran out or someone invoked the hand of God to get out of the situation which is probably why they decided never to bring God into scientific discussions and the first demarcation between God and science was born!! 

The word atom means indivisible or that which cannot be cut. Take any object in the visible universe and you can break it down to one last atom which cannot be cut any further. Democritus reasoned that atom were of different shapes and sizes with hooks to attach themselves to other atoms. Iron atoms were strong, water atoms were light and slippery, salt atoms were sharp and pointed and so on. Of course, we have cut and recut the atom to find more fundamental particles but at that point in time it was a remarkable discovery. 

Before we attempt to understand atoms, particle physics and their significance, we will first look at the two foundational pillars in modern physics: 
Einstein’s Theory of General Relativity – This framework explains the universe on the largest scales. It governs celestial bodies, the thermonuclear reactions powering the Sun, gravity, and planetary orbits. It has enabled humanity to explore space, send satellites and astronauts beyond Earth, build space stations, and even consider the possibility of colonizing other planets. Einstein’s famous equation, E = mc², is central to understanding the relationship between energy and mass, and we will break it down in simple terms. 
Quantum Mechanics – This theory governs reality on the smallest scales, dealing with atoms and subatomic particles. General relativity accurately describes the universe until 10⁻³⁶ seconds after the Big Bang. Beyond that point, the laws of physics as we know them cease to function, and quantum mechanics takes over. 
Both theories have been tested to unimaginable precision, and both work perfectly—but they are fundamentally incompatible. This means that within our universe, two entirely different sets of laws exist. If you were to attend a lecture on general relativity and then step into a quantum mechanics class, you might question whether both belong to the same field of science. Relativity is elegant and structured, like a perfectly fitting jigsaw puzzle, while quantum mechanics is chaotic and unpredictable, defying common sense at every turn.  Einstein spent 10 years studying quantum mechanics and could not accept that there could be two different laws of physics in one universe, and which is incompatible, hence his famous quote “God does not play dice.”  

Theorists propose and physicists validate but there is much more to physicists which is why we have many famous physicists to theorists. Theories fall out, but physicists discover a lot more and do the hard work. Democritus was one of those rare theorists whose contribution to science is much valued. 

Aristotle
Imagine living in 380 BC when science and philosophy flourished in Ancient Greece, shaped by great thinkers such as Plato, Pythagoras, and Aristotle. Greek society was built around city-states, agriculture was a thriving industry, and slavery was common. The daily life of the people varied greatly—while the wealthy enjoyed wheat bread, fine clothing, and education, the lower classes survived on barley bread and vegetables. The Greeks worshiped multiple gods, believing that deities lived like humans, experiencing emotions such as jealousy and anger, and requiring sacrifices for favor. 

Science, at the time, was the pursuit of the elite. Physicians, philosophers, and scholars were highly valued by rulers, and Aristotle was among the most influential figures in shaping both science and Western thought. His ideas on the geocentric model—the belief that the Earth was at the center of the universe—were widely accepted and later reinforced by the medieval Catholic Church. Because Aristotle's theories aligned with religious doctrine, questioning them was considered heresy, leading to centuries of intellectual stagnation. 

Aristotle argued that the sun, moon, and stars revolved around the Earth, and he classified matter into four fundamental elements: earth, water, fire, and air. He also introduced the concept of a fifth essence, or quintessence, which he believed composed the heavens—unchanging and perfect. 

The Church embraced Aristotle’s views, integrating them into theological teachings. This alliance between science and religious doctrine made Aristotle’s ideas immune to criticism for centuries. The belief that Earth was the universe's center remained dominant until Copernicus and Galileo challenged it in the Renaissance, reshaping our understanding of astronomy. 

While Aristotle’s influence shaped medieval thought, history shows that rigid adherence to certain beliefs—whether scientific or religious—can slow progress. Religious texts, like the Gospels, were written to convey principles rather than specific timelines. The universe began approximately 14 billion years ago, while humans evolved around 5 million years ago—a vast gap in cosmic time. 

Copernicus
Science and faith, though often seen as opposing forces, both rely on storytelling. In business, politics, and religion, narratives shape how we perceive reality. A visionary entrepreneur, for example, tells a compelling story about their company to gain investors' trust. Similarly, religious parables convey deeper moral truths rather than literal history. Principles, rather than rigid interpretations, provide guidance in navigating life’s challenges. 

The influence of Aristotle, reinforced by the medieval Church, dominated scientific thought until thinkers like Copernicus and Galileo paved the way for modern science. Their discoveries marked a turning point, reminding us that science is an ever-evolving pursuit of truth—one that thrives on questioning, testing, and refining our understanding of the universe. 

Religion is based on faith and trust. When Jesus told the fishermen, “Why are you wasting your time fishing for fish? Come with me, and I will teach you how to fish for men,” they immediately left everything and followed him. This act exemplifies faith—believing without questioning. Science, on the other hand, operates in the opposite manner. It is built on skepticism, facts, and constant inquiry. Scientists doubt everything; when a new theory is proposed, it is easier to disprove than to prove. This process of rigorous scrutiny has been crucial to scientific progress—every wrong turn represents lost time and resources, so theories must be tested and refined. 

One of the pivotal moments in this conflict between faith and reason was when Nicolaus Copernicus questioned the long-accepted geocentric model of the universe. Aristotle and Ptolemy had established the belief that the Earth was the center of the universe, a view upheld by the Catholic Church. But Copernicus, troubled by contradictions in celestial observations, began to doubt these teachings. His ideas would eventually ignite a scientific revolution. 

Copernicus was deeply conflicted. His uncle was a bishop, and his religious upbringing made him hesitant to challenge Church doctrine. Yet, his dedication to scientific truth compelled him to pursue his research. His doubts were fueled by the book Summary of Ptolemy’s Almagest by Johannes Regiomontanus. Regiomontanus had analyzed Ptolemy’s works and found significant errors, such as the claim that the Moon’s distance from Earth should vary by a factor of two, which would cause it to appear to grow and shrink in size each month—something no one had ever observed. These inconsistencies led Copernicus to suspect that fundamental flaws existed in the geocentric model. 

By 1514, based on his own observations, Copernicus proposed a radical shift: from a geocentric (Earth-centered) to a heliocentric (Sun-centered) universe. This meant that Earth was not the center of creation but just another planet orbiting the Sun. Aware of the dangers of contradicting the Church, he circulated his ideas only among trusted friends. He feared persecution—after all, challenging religious dogma could mean execution. 

Over the years, Copernicus refined his theories, eventually completing The Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres in 1532. However, he hesitated to publish it. Word of his ideas reached the Pope and other church officials, but they initially took no action, perhaps hoping to avoid drawing attention to his work. It was only after Copernicus’s death in 1543 that the book was published. Two factors spared it from immediate censorship: first, he had dedicated it to the Pope, and second, the book was so mathematically complex that only scholars could understand it. Over time, however, his ideas spread, and Johannes Kepler built upon them, proving that planetary orbits were elliptical rather than circular. 

As support for heliocentrism grew, the Church felt increasingly threatened. Eventually, it banned Copernicus’s book and declared that promoting heliocentric theory was heresy. Despite this resistance, Copernicus’s work marked the beginning of a scientific revolution—one that championed evidence-based inquiry and the mathematical laws governing nature. 

Galileo 
Four hundred years ago, a man pointed a homemade telescope at the night sky and made a discovery that changed history. That man was Galileo Galilei. His observation of Jupiter’s moons provided undeniable proof that not everything revolved around the Earth. This discovery dealt a devastating blow to Aristotle’s geocentric model. From Galileo’s time onward, science surged forward, unraveling the mysteries of the cosmos. In the span of 380 years, humanity has gone from simple telescopes to the Hubble Space Telescope, moon landings, Mars rovers, and interstellar probes—driven by the same relentless pursuit of knowledge that Galileo embodied. 

Born on February 15, 1564, in Pisa, Italy, Galileo was torn between two paths: medicine and the priesthood. But fate intervened—one day, he attended a mathematics lecture that changed his life. Realizing that mathematics was the key to understanding the universe, he abandoned medicine and devoted himself to science. 

In 1609, Galileo learned about a crude telescope invented by Dutch lens makers. Inspired, he built his own, refining its design. When he trained it on Jupiter, he noticed what he initially thought were three fixed stars near the planet. But as he continued observing night after night, he realized they were actually moons orbiting Jupiter. This was a groundbreaking revelation—if celestial bodies could orbit something other than Earth, then the geocentric model was fundamentally flawed. 

Galileo’s discoveries threatened the Church’s authority. In 1616, the Church officially declared heliocentrism “formally heretical,” and Galileo was warned to abandon his support for it. But in 1632, he defied this order and published Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, in which he boldly defended Copernican theory. The Church responded with force—Galileo was tried by the Inquisition, found guilty of heresy, and sentenced to house arrest for the rest of his life. He was forbidden from publishing further works, and all his writings were banned. 

Galileo died in 1642 at the age of 77. It took nearly 200 years—until 1835—for the Catholic Church to remove his works from the list of banned books. But by then, the scientific revolution was unstoppable. The heliocentric model had led to the study of gravity and its effects, opening the door to modern physics. 

The conflict between science and religion has shaped human history, yet both continue to coexist. Science seeks answers through doubt and evidence, while religion provides meaning through faith. Copernicus and Galileo stood at the crossroads of these two forces, risking everything to pursue the truth. Their courage and discoveries set the foundation for modern science, proving that knowledge, once uncovered, cannot be silenced. 

Issac Newton
If you happen to be in a situation where there is rain and sun at the same time, you are in for a treat, look to the opposite side of the sun and you will see a beautiful rainbow in the sky. Ancients believed that the rainbow was a bridge for the gods from heaven to earth. Isaac Newton experimented with light by passing white light through a prism thus refracting it to form the color spectrum he then passed the spectrum through another prism and converted the spectrum back to white light. When light passes through drops of water in the sky it creates a spectrum, and we see a beautiful rainbow adorning the sky. The angle at which the red light exits the raindrop is 42 degrees and can never be more and the violet light exits at 40 degrees and not more, the different exit angles of light create the rainbow spectrum. A rainbow is natures spectacle but there are little artists like sunlight, raindrops and precise angles that create the magical views for us, and it is our scientists who derive the magic of nature to showcase the awesomeness of creation.  

When Apollo 15 landed on the moon, astronaut David Scott did an experiment, he had a hammer in one hand and a falcon feather in the other and he dropped both at the same time. The feather and the hammer drop to the ground as if in slow motion and hit the ground simultaneously, this would never happen on Earth as the atmosphere creates friction but, on the moon, there is no atmosphere. Aristotle had proposed that heavier objects would hit the ground faster than lighter ones, but Galileo disproved him with his Leaning Tower of Pisa experiment and Newton gave it an equation, F=MA or force = mass * acceleration. Mass is unlike weight and is the same anywhere in the universe whereas weight is local to our planet. Example, if a person weighs 70 kilograms his mass would be 70*9.8=686 newtons. The force of gravity would be weaker on the moon by about a sixth of Earth’s gravity and the same person would have a mass of 112 newtons on the moon. Of course, the object with a heavier mass would have a greater impact, like when you bang a coffee mug on a table the table will bang the mug back with equal force according to Newtons third law of motion, that is every action has an equal and opposite reaction, here the force of gravity exerted downwards by the mug is cancelled by the upward force of the table on the mug and the net effect is zero. You can do an experiment to test this on your weighing scales, stand on the scales flat and then stand on your toes quickly and then back flat on the heel and you will see the scales moving past your actual weight, then below and then settling down to your actual weight. What happens is that the scale measures the force it exerts against your weight and when you stand on your toes, there is an acceleration and when you drop down from your toes there is a deceleration which causes an increase, decrease and then a settling down to your actual weight. 

At the age of 12, Newton began formal schooling, but his education focused on the classics rather than science or mathematics. At 17, his mother pulled him out of school, intending for him to become a farmer. Fortunately for science, Newton had neither the interest nor the aptitude for farming. Since his mother refused to fund his higher education, he worked part-time to pay his college fees. One fateful day at a fair, he stumbled upon a mathematics book, which he struggled to comprehend but found fascinating. This curiosity led him to later develop calculus. 

Newton joined Trinity College, but the Great Plague forced its closure, compelling him to return home. It was during this period that he made groundbreaking discoveries in optics, motion, and gravity. Newton despised criticism and avoided publishing his work, but thanks to the persistence of astronomer Edmund Halley, the world eventually gained access to his Principia Mathematica. 

Edmund Halley is best known for predicting the return of a comet, now called Halley’s Comet. In 1705, he identified that comets observed in 1531, 1607, and 1682 were the same and predicted its return in 1758. Though he did not live to see his prediction come true, his calculations were proven correct. 

However, Halley’s lesser known but equally significant contribution was his role in publishing Principia Mathematica. At the Royal Society, Halley, along with Robert Hooke and Christopher Wren, sought to understand planetary motion and hypothesized that a force kept planets in orbit, likely following an inverse-square law. Unable to provide mathematical proof, Halley visited Newton, who had already worked out the solution. With Halley’s encouragement and financial support, Newton completed Principia, laying the foundation of classical physics.  

Newton described gravity as a force exerted between material bodies, explaining why the Moon orbits the Earth and why planets revolve around the Sun. However, he struggled to understand how this force acted across the vast emptiness of space. He marveled at the regularity of planetary motion, questioning why all planets orbit the Sun in the same plane and direction. Newton believed this order was established by divine intervention, setting the initial conditions for the solar system. 

Newton’s discoveries continue to shape our understanding of the universe, and his laws of motion and gravity remain fundamental to modern physics. From rainbows to planetary motion, his insights transformed the way we perceive the world, revealing the intricate balance of nature through the lens of science. 

Albert Einstein
Albert Einstein was one of the most remarkable scientists and revolutionary thinkers the world has ever seen. Much credit must go to his parents for encouraging his curiosity. At just four years old, they allowed him to explore the neighborhood independently. When he was five, his father gave him a compass, which fascinated him and ignited his lifelong interest in physics. 

Einstein was born in 1879 in Ulm, Germany. He disliked school, detesting memorization, and struggled with its rigid structure. His Munich schoolmaster famously remarked, "He will never amount to anything." He failed his first attempt to enter a technical college but succeeded on his second try. Even after graduating, he struggled for two years without a job. Finally, a friend helped him secure a position at a patent office in Bern, Switzerland. It was during this time that he published groundbreaking papers on theoretical physics. 

Newton had proposed that space and time were absolute. According to him, if clocks were placed on the Moon, Mars, or anywhere in the universe, they would all tick at the same rate. If the Sun suddenly exploded, Earth would immediately spin away into space, and this event would be visible from anywhere in the universe at the same instant. 

For a decade, Einstein wrestled with this concept of absolute space and time. One day, he discussed the problem with his friend Michele Besso, a colleague at the patent office. After an intense debate, the solution remained elusive. Frustrated, Einstein decided to put it aside, but the idea continued to haunt him. 

Then, one evening, as he was driving home through Bern, he noticed the city’s clock tower. A thought struck him: What if I were moving away from the clock at the speed of light? If one traveled at the speed of light, light could never reach them. The result? Time would slow down, and at the speed of light, the clock would appear frozen. However, if he looked at his own watch, it would continue ticking normally. This realization led to the formulation of the theory of relativity: space and time are not absolute, as Newton proposed, but are relative and interdependent. 

To understand relativity, consider a simple experiment: a boy on a train holds a ball in his palm. To him, the ball is stationary. However, to an observer on the platform, the boy and the ball are in motion. This creates two frames of reference: the observer and the observed. If the train is stationary and the boy throws the ball against the wall, its speed remains the same for both the boy and the observer. However, if the train moves at 90% of the speed of light and the boy throws the ball at 90% of the speed of light, Newton would have predicted that the ball’s speed should add up to 180% of the speed of light. Einstein, however, proved that this was incorrect—no object can travel at the speed of light because its mass would become infinite, making movement impossible. 

Newton described gravity as a force between two masses, but he never understood how this force was transmitted. He could not explain why planets orbit the Sun. Einstein's theory of relativity offered an answer: mass causes space to bend, and the greater the mass, the greater the curvature. 

Imagine a rubber sheet stretched tightly. If you place a heavy ball on it, the sheet bends downward. Similarly, the Sun’s mass bends the space around it. According to Newton’s laws, a body in motion remains in motion unless acted upon by an external force. In space, where there is no friction, planets continue moving in curved paths around the Sun because of this bending of space, much like a marble rolling inside a funnel. 

In 1911, Einstein proposed a modification to Newtonian gravity, suggesting that massive objects could bend light. He even calculated that this curvature would be twice what Newton had predicted. British scientist Arthur Eddington was intrigued by Einstein’s work, despite skepticism from his British colleagues. To test Einstein’s theory, scientists needed to measure the position of a star when the Sun was far from it and then again when the Sun was near it. If Einstein was correct, the Sun’s mass would bend the star’s light, shifting its position. The challenge was that the Sun’s brightness made direct observations impossible—except during a solar eclipse. 
A total solar eclipse in 1919 provided the perfect opportunity. Eddington traveled to Africa to conduct the experiment. Although bad weather threatened the mission, the skies cleared just in time. Eddington captured images of the stars behind the Sun and later presented his findings to the Royal Society and the Royal Astronomical Society. The results were clear: Einstein was right. This discovery overturned 230 years of Newtonian gravitational theory. 

Gravity follows an inverse square law: doubling the distance between two objects reduces the gravitational force to a quarter, increasing the distance tenfold reduces it to one-hundredth, and so on. Any deviation from this law would make planetary orbits unstable. Even the smallest change in the gravitational constant—by a factor of just 0.0001—could render our existence impossible. 

The universe appears precisely tuned. The speed of light, the force of gravity, and many other constants are finely balanced. Earth is at just the right distance from the Sun to maintain a stable climate, liquid water, and the conditions necessary for life. 

Science progresses relentlessly, fueled by curiosity and rigorous investigation. According to the story of Eden, humanity’s first ancestors ate from the Tree of Knowledge, ensuring that humans would always seek to understand the universe. Science has made extraordinary strides in decoding the workings of nature, thanks to the dedication of scientists who build upon the discoveries of their predecessors. However, scientific progress is not linear. The complexities of the universe often lead researchers to dead ends, requiring them to rethink their approaches. Funding for scientific research is another significant challenge. Despite these obstacles, the pursuit of knowledge continues. 

Religion, too, must embrace the same dedication and rigor in its quest to understand God. In ancient times, prophets, miracles, and saints played a crucial role in spiritual life. Today, however, society seems more focused on material gain, leading to a shift toward self-interest and competition. Mammals exhibit behaviors such as nurturing, love, and compassion, whereas reptiles are often aggressive and solitary. Increasingly, human behavior resembles that of reptiles, driven by greed and power. 

Just as Michelangelo dedicated years of his life to painting the Sistine Chapel, applying relentless focus and effort to every detail, we must bring the same dedication to both our work and our spiritual journeys. Whether or not anyone acknowledges our efforts, we can be sure that God is watching. 

Sun
When was the last time you looked up at the heavens? The celestial bodies are truly beautiful, unfathomable which is why we believe in a God. If you happen to travel through the villages of India in the early hours of the day, you will see bare bodied people - symbolic that we are all equal in the eyes of God - offering prayers to the Sun God. The sun is truly beautiful, a huge ball suspended in the sky, the entire world wakes up to the sun; humans, insects, animals, everyone draws energy from the sun. When you feel the warm glow on your skin, remember that it is the effect of photons which have travelled 150 million kilometers from the sun at the speed of light to touch your skin.  

All of nature works on balance, our body works on balance or homeostasis. If you have been for a medical test, you will see the narrow range within which our body controls the different functions like blood pressure, sugar levels, etc. and that is why religions preach against any form of temptation, it is a way to bring balance to our life and to assist our body and mind in its functioning. A star too is the result of a balance of forces; the force of gravity, the force of nuclear fusion and when this happens, we see cosmic magic, the star lights up, spreads its warmth and embraces planets. Similarly, it is with us, just like planets are connected to a star, we too are connected to the divine.  

Our sun is a medium sized second or third generation star which means that an earlier bigger star exploded, and our sun was formed from this explosion. Our sun gives us light, and it is because of the sun that we see our world in a spectrum of colors. When light falls on an object, example a tomato, the tomato absorbs most of the light and reflects some of it which is red, if all light is absorbed by the object, you will see black and if all light is reflected then it will be white. Our sun is an absolute marvel of creation, creation is laws, laws are mathematical equations and that is how Einstein was able to describe the working of the sun through his famous equation e=mc^2. Everything in our world is made up of atoms and that includes the mighty sun as well. Atoms are the smallest particles that make up matter, atoms are made up of protons, neutrons and electrons. 

Our sun consists largely of hydrogen and helium atoms, a hydrogen atom consists of one electron which orbits the nucleus which contains the proton, expose the atom to a high burst of energy and the electron will jump orbit away from the nucleus, expose it to even higher energy levels and the electron can leave the atom, and this is what happens at the core of the sun. The mass of our sun is huge and creates stupendous gravity which pulls the hydrogen atoms to its core and in the process, because of the high energy it also strips the electrons from the atoms leaving just the nuclei and due to the tremendous pressure, the nuclei jam together at the core of the sun. When two nuclei fuse together, we have what is called thermonuclear fusion, voila. The amazing thing about nuclear fusion is that even though it requires a huge amount of energy in the form of gravity to start it and which is provided by the suns mass, the energy released through nuclear fusion is huge as well and balances the gravitational pull of the sun thereby keeping the sun stable.  

To understand the energy that is released during nuclear fusion, we come to Einstein’s famous equation e=mc^2. When two nuclei A and B fuse together its mass will not be equal to A + B because some mass escapes and this mass which escapes is converted into energy which is defined by the equation e (energy) = m (the mass which escaped) * square of the speed of light (speed of light = 186282 miles/sec) Now you can see that even for a small mass there is a huge amount of light energy. The sun shines bright. And God said let there be light and there was light!! Congratulations, pat your back, remember you are one of the very few people on this planet who understands Einstein’s famous equation e=mc^2 

When a large star burns up all its fuel (about 10 billion years) it will expand drastically to about 100 times its present size and explode in a colorful dazzle of colors and light known as the planetary Nebula. This dramatic death and cosmic display is beautiful in its symbolism that the heavens rejoice the birth of new stars, planets and probably life. It is at the core of a star that the atoms combine with free moving electrons to produce heavier atoms like carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, silver etc. which are the basic building blocks of life. Nuclear fusion can only happen in large stars and the star must die for habitable planets and life to form. 

In about 5 billion years, our sun will burn up all its fuel causing it to expand significantly and become a red giant star before eventually dying and shrinking into a white dwarf. Today we spend trillions of dollars building sophisticated nuclear weapons with the objective to kill our own kind. No other creature on this planet has planned for such large-scale destruction of its own kind. Five billion years is a long time, we may evolve, we may find resources for faster modes of transport to reach habitable planets, or we may go extinct like the dinosaurs or through self-destruction and nuclear weapons seems the most likely cause for human extinction.  

This knowledge led to the development of nuclear weapons, culminating in the detonation of the first atomic bomb over Hiroshima on August 6, 1945. The explosion, resulting from the fission of mere fractions of uranium, annihilated an entire city in an instant, killing approximately 80,000 people. By the year’s end, radiation exposure had claimed thousands more lives. 

Decades later, the Chernobyl disaster of April 26, 1986, demonstrated the catastrophic consequences of nuclear energy mishandled. Explosions at Reactor 4 of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant released an unprecedented amount of radiation into the atmosphere. Within days, the radioactive contamination spread across Europe and beyond, reaching as far as India, the United States, and Canada. The long-term effects of this disaster persist, serving as a grim reminder of the dangers associated with nuclear technology. 

Throughout history, religious and philosophical texts have warned humanity of the consequences of unchecked ambition. The story of Adam and Eve serves as an allegory for the perils of acquiring knowledge without wisdom. In the pursuit of power and control, humanity has created weapons capable of annihilating entire civilizations. Yet, the Earth has always provided abundantly for its inhabitants—there is enough for everyone. The challenge lies in ensuring that wisdom prevails over recklessness, and that the knowledge we possess is used to sustain, rather than destroy, the world entrusted to us.     

Milky way galaxy
We’re used to people identifying themselves by their country or city, but what if one day we introduce ourselves by our galaxy? Imagine a future where intergalactic travel is possible, and you hear, “I’m from the Milky Way” or “I’m from Andromeda.” Sounds thrilling, doesn’t it? 

Since anything is possible, let’s not be caught off guard—let’s get to know our home, the Milky Way Galaxy. Picture this: Take 300 one-meter-high boxes and fill them with fine sand. Each grain of sand represents a star in our galaxy. Now, pick one grain and mark it yellow—that’s our Sun. Planet Earth, which is about 100 times smaller than the Sun, is just a speck within this vast expanse. And here’s the real mind-bender—there are billions of galaxies, each containing hundreds of billions of stars. The sheer scale of the universe is beyond comprehension. 

Space is a paradox of chaos and serenity. It’s a realm of monstrous beauty—stars exploding, black holes devouring entire suns—yet utterly silent, as sound does not travel in space. On a clear summer night, the stars twinkle above us. But venture beyond Earth's atmosphere, away from light pollution, and they stop twinkling. That glowing band stretching across the sky? The ancients described it as a river, a celestial stream of milk and in reality, this is heart of our galaxy - the Milky Way. 

Our galaxy is a majestic spiral with four long arms of gas, dust, and approximately 300 billion stars. Our solar system sits on one of these arms, tucked away in a quiet corner. But as we move toward the galactic center, the scene transforms. Stars orbit at breakneck speeds, and one of the fastest-moving known stars, S2, reaches an astonishing 11 million miles per hour. What force could possibly pull such massive celestial bodies into orbit? The answer lies at the heart of our galaxy—a supermassive black hole known as Sagittarius A*. This cosmic giant, with a mass four million times that of our Sun, holds an immense gravitational grip over its surroundings. 

Astronauts who have witnessed space firsthand often describe a sense of profound humility, seeing our tiny blue planet suspended in the vast void. But the spectacle at the galactic center is even more staggering—a cosmic ballet of blazing suns, swirling gas, and unfathomable forces. 

Just think for a moment, we live in this huge universe but just one planet in this entire universe supports life. One day you blinked and found yourself in this beautiful universe, we walk this Earth, we walk it for a lifetime and it’s a truly wonderful life, Earth is paradise, the garden of Eden. The Buddhist philosophy beautifully captures the rarity of life with this analogy: Imagine a blind turtle roaming the depths of the ocean the size of our universe. On the surface of this ocean is a wooden box, tossed and turned by the waves. Once every thousand years the turtle will go up to the surface of the ocean and the chance of that turtle hitting the wooden box is the chance, we have at being born as a human being. Such is the magnitude of the gift of life that God has given us. 

Dark matter and energy
In 1929, astronomer Edwin Hubble made a groundbreaking discovery while studying distant galaxies. He observed that almost every galaxy was moving away from Earth, indicating that the universe was expanding. This phenomenon can be understood using a concept similar to the Doppler effect, which we commonly experience with sound. 

For example, when an ambulance approaches, its siren sounds higher in pitch, and as it moves away, the pitch lowers. This occurs because sound waves are compressed when moving toward us and stretched when moving away. A similar effect applies to light waves: 
Redshift occurs when an object moves away from us, stretching the light waves and shifting them toward the red end of the spectrum. 
Blueshift happens when an object moves closer, compressing the light waves and shifting them toward the blue end of the spectrum. 

The Hubble Space Telescope, which orbits Earth, uses this principle to analyze the light from distant objects. By measuring redshift, astronomers have determined not only that the universe is expanding, but also that our neighboring galaxy, Andromeda, is on a collision course with the Milky Way. This grand merger is expected to take place in approximately four billion years. 

In the 1930s, Dutch astronomer Jan Oort made another startling discovery. He studied the velocity of stars in the Milky Way and found that they were moving faster than expected based on the visible matter present. According to Newton’s laws, an object moving at high speeds should eventually break free from gravitational pull. However, the stars remained in orbit, suggesting that an unknown force was acting upon them. 

Oort estimated the total mass of the Milky Way and found that visible matter alone was insufficient to explain the galaxy's rotation. This led him to propose the existence of an invisible, mysterious substance—which we now call dark matter. Later studies revealed that dark energy—a repulsive force—was responsible for accelerating the universe’s expansion. 

Current estimates suggest that the universe consists of: 
5% normal matter (everything we can see: planets, stars, galaxies) 
27% dark matter (which exerts gravitational pull but does not emit light) 
68% dark energy (which counteracts gravity and pushes the universe apart) 

The question remains: Will the universe expand forever, or will it eventually collapse? 
Some ancient Hindu texts propose an interesting perspective. According to Hindu cosmology, the universe follows a cyclic pattern, where it exists for 4.32 billion years during the day of Brahma, then ceases to exist for another 4.32 billion years during Brahma’s night. This theory loosely resembles the idea of a Big Crunch—a scenario where the universe eventually stops expanding, contracts due to gravity, and collapses back into a singularity, possibly leading to the birth of a new universe. 
However, given that the universe is currently expanding at an accelerating rate, the Big Crunch theory is unlikely—at least based on our current understanding of physics. Instead, if dark energy continues to dominate, the universe may keep expanding indefinitely, growing colder and emptier over time. 

From Edwin Hubble’s discovery of an expanding universe to Jan Oort’s revelation of unseen forces shaping galaxies, our understanding of the cosmos continues to evolve. The universe is vast, mysterious, and full of unanswered questions. While we may never fully grasp its complexities, each discovery brings us one step closer to understanding our place in this grand cosmic journey. 

Quantum mechanics
Science seeks to explain the universe through predictable cause-and-effect relationships, as seen in classical physics. However, quantum mechanics challenges this order, introducing concepts that defy our intuitive understanding of reality. One such phenomenon is wave-particle duality, where fundamental particles behave both as discrete particles and as waves. 

Consider a simple experiment: A board with two slits is placed in front of a screen. When light is shined at the slits, it produces an interference pattern—alternating bright and dark bands—on the screen. This is expected, as light behaves as a wave. 

Now, let’s conduct a quantum version of this experiment using electrons. If we fire electrons at a single open slit, they behave like tiny particles, forming a single band on the screen, much like tennis balls thrown through an opening. However, when both slits are open and electrons are fired one by one, an interference pattern appears—suggesting that each electron somehow passes through both slits at once and interferes with itself like a wave. 

To test this bizarre behavior, scientists placed detectors near the slits to observe which path the electron takes. Shockingly, when observed, the electrons stopped behaving like waves and instead formed two distinct bands, as expected for particles. This suggests that the very act of observation alters the outcome—a perplexing revelation at the heart of quantum mechanics. 

In 1935, Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky, and Nathan Rosen proposed a thought experiment—now known as the EPR paradox—to highlight what they saw as flaws in quantum mechanics. According to quantum theory, particles exist in an uncertain state until measured. Suppose an unstable particle with spin 0 decays into two new particles (A and B), which fly off in opposite directions. Since the total spin must remain zero, if particle A is measured to have spin +0.5, then particle B must have spin -0.5. 

But here’s the paradox: Until measurement, both particles exist in a superposition of possible spins. The moment particle A is observed, particle B instantly assumes the opposite spin—no matter how far apart they are. This suggests that information is transmitted faster than the speed of light, violating Einstein’s theory of relativity. Einstein dismissed this idea as “spooky action at a distance,” but experiments have since confirmed that quantum entanglement is real, even if we still don’t fully understand it. 

Physicist Erwin Schrödinger devised a famous thought experiment to illustrate quantum superposition. Imagine a cat inside a sealed box containing a vial of poison triggered by the decay of a radioactive atom. Since quantum mechanics states that the atom exists in a superposition of decayed and undecayed states until observed, the cat, too, should be simultaneously alive and dead—until we open the box and observe its state. 

This leads to deeper questions. If multiple quantum possibilities exist, could they all be realized in different branches of the universe? Physicist Hugh Everett proposed the Many-Worlds Interpretation, which suggests that every quantum event splits reality into parallel histories. In one universe, you chose one elevator; in another, you picked the stairs. Every possible outcome exists somewhere. While this idea seems far-fetched, it is gaining acceptance among modern physicists, influencing mathematical models of space-time. 

Currently, two fundamental laws govern our universe: general relativity, which describes the large-scale cosmos, and quantum mechanics, which governs the subatomic world. The problem? They don’t agree. The search for a Grand Unified Theory—a single framework that unites these laws—is ongoing. 

Finally, consider this: If consciousness influences the behavior of fundamental particles, could it be woven into the fabric of the cosmos itself? Could it be that the act of observation—the act of being aware—is not just a passive process but a fundamental force in the universe? Food for thought. 

Global warming
Throughout history, the universe has followed natural laws, which likely influenced early religions in shaping societal codes of conduct. These laws have helped maintain order among billions of people, fostering a more peaceful existence. 

When the Sun formed, its gravity pulled in surrounding particles, causing collisions that created heavier elements. These elements sank to form Earth's core, while lighter materials formed the crust. Initially, Earth’s atmosphere consisted mainly of hydrogen and helium, with no magnetic field to shield it from solar winds and radiation. Over time, the planet cooled, volcanic eruptions released gases into the atmosphere, and nitrogen formed. As Earth rotated, the movement of liquid metal in its outer core generated a magnetic field, which now protects the planet from solar winds. Without this field, Earth's atmosphere would have been stripped away, making life impossible due to extreme radiation exposure. 

Life began about 3 billion years ago with bacteria, followed by the evolution of cells and plants, which gradually altered Earth's atmosphere. Greenhouse gases formed a protective layer, trapping heat and maintaining a stable climate. The Sun warms the planet during the day, and while some heat escapes into space, greenhouse gases retain enough warmth to sustain life. 

The Agricultural and Industrial Revolutions allowed humanity to shift focus from survival to technological and scientific advancements. This progress improved healthcare, reduced mortality rates, and increased prosperity—but also led to overpopulation and a higher carbon footprint. The Happy Planet Index provides insight into how well we balance happiness with environmental sustainability. 

However, modern lifestyles and deforestation continue to increase greenhouse gas emissions, exacerbating global warming. Every time we flip a switch, a turbine burns more fossil fuel, releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. While reducing fossil fuel consumption is essential, the root problem is our disregard for nature. We must allow Earth to regenerate before exploiting its resources further. 

Paradoxically, trees—our greatest allies—are being destroyed at an alarming rate. The oceans attempt to compensate by absorbing excess carbon, but this warms the water, endangering marine life and coral reefs. Though often described as a fragile blue planet, Earth has survived asteroid impacts and other catastrophes, regenerating each time. The true fragility lies not in Earth, but in humanity itself. If we fail to recognize this and take immediate action, future generations may never get the chance to call Earth home. 

Genetics
Around two billion years ago, Earth was teeming with cells, simple bacterial cells and from this vast ocean of microbes, arose a single, complex cell with an intricate internal structure. How or why, this happened remains a mystery—one that nature has never repeated. Everything on Earth—plants, animals, and humans—share the same father. From this celestial cell, came all life on Earth. 

Scientists have long sought to unravel this mystery, attempting to recreate Earth's early atmosphere—the primordial soup—in laboratory experiments. By combining chemicals, gases, and electric sparks, they have only managed to produce simple organic molecules, but no life. Billions of years of evolution, the right environment and one life giving cell was chosen from a sea of cells and the eureka moment in nature had arrived, the cell synthesized, and life had found a way. 

Around a billion years ago, Earth became a planet of plants. In plant cells, chloroplasts function as energy factories, enabling photosynthesis. Plants absorb carbon dioxide, convert sunlight, water, and carbon into carbohydrates, and release oxygen. This process transformed Earth's atmosphere, filling the sky with life-sustaining oxygen. 

Approximately 600 million years ago, an explosion of diverse life forms emerged—the Cambrian Explosion. The oceans produced a rapid succession of new species. By 65 million years ago, Earth was dominated by reptiles—dinosaurs that walked, swam, and flew. However, they did not survive the catastrophic Cretaceous-Tertiary (K-T) extinction event, which wiped out most species on Earth. 

In 1956, Russian astronomer Joseph Shklovsky suggested that a supernova—the explosion of a dying star—had bathed Earth in lethal radiation, exterminating the dinosaurs. However, no traces of radiation were found to support this theory. 

In 1980, father and son scientists Luis and Walter Alvarez proposed the impact hypothesis, based on their discovery of high levels of iridium—a rare element common in asteroids—at various sites worldwide. This theory gained strong support in 1990, when scientists located the massive Chicxulub Crater at the tip of Mexico’s Yucatán Peninsula. 

According to this hypothesis, an asteroid 10 kilometers wide, traveling at 40,000 miles per hour, struck Earth 65 million years ago. The impact released energy equivalent to 100 million megatons of TNT—more than a million of the most powerful hydrogen bombs ever tested. The explosion sent debris, including iridium, across the planet. Day turned to night, temperatures plummeted, and a mass extinction followed—marking the beginning of the Ice Age. 

The history of Earth's recovery from this cataclysm was revealed at Corral Bluffs, where sediment layers preserved a million-year timeline of post-impact evolution. The asteroid wiped out 75% of all living creatures and half of Earth's plant population. Temperatures plunged to 5°C, and the planet was dominated by ferns and small mammals—such as shrews—that had once lived in the shadows of dinosaurs. 

Over time, three major warming periods reshaped the planet. Volcanic eruptions released vast amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, warming Earth and triggering evolutionary surges. With each warming period, new species emerged—larger, more diverse, and better adapted to their transformed world. 

The human genome project
A man went to church for confession and confessed the most absurd of sins. The priest who had spent most of the morning listening to the vile nature of humans was irritated at this man before him. The man sensing the priest’s discomfort said to him “Father, you may be irritated with me but just like I need you, you also need me otherwise whose confession will you hear?” going a step further he said, “God also needs me like I need him, otherwise who will pray to him?” Yes, God needs us humans otherwise who will admire his creation? 

A cell is tiny, about one tenth of a millimeter in size and can only be seen through a microscope and inside this cell is a nucleus which houses the DNA, so how did we decode that DNA is the seed of life? It has been a long journey from theories to discoveries to finally identifying and mapping the sequence of close to 3 billion base pairs of the human genome. 

The Human Genome Project, initiated in 1990 and completed in 2003, unraveled the sequence of nearly three billion base pairs in human DNA. On June 20, 2000, then U.S. President Bill Clinton remarked, "Without a doubt, this is the most important, most wondrous map ever produced by humankind." Perhaps the creator was watching with a smile on his face and proud of his creation. 

We now go on a journey to understand how we were able to decode the gene as a unit of heredity. The word code has its origins in the Latin word caudex, or the sheets of material made from the pith of trees which were used for writing, and what did God use to write the code of life? It has been an amazing journey for science considering the many limitations that scientists are bound by because of ethics involving human life but not only that, a wrong mutation could create havoc and possibly destroy life on earth. Then there is the bad side to any history and science has had its share which you will read about in this fascinating journey to hunt down the DNA. 

Long before scientists understood genes, ancient scholars speculated on how traits were passed down. Around 460 BC, the Greek physician Hippocrates proposed that male semen contained a detailed blueprint of the body. He imagined it as a catalog of traits, transferring a pre-written design to the offspring, while the female simply provided the nurturing space. 

However, the philosopher Aristotle challenged this idea. In his work Generation of Animals, he argued that heredity was more complex. He observed that children sometimes inherited traits from grandparents, that physical disabilities did not always pass to offspring, and that male and female reproductive roles were not as one-sided as Hippocrates suggested. Aristotle theorized that both male and female contributed to the formation of life—men providing "instructions" and women supplying the raw material. 

Since the time of Aristotle, it was accepted that sperm was central for reproduction but there also came variations and additions to this theory and the leading one was preformation. Preformation means that a child is already available in a shrunken form in the semen and all it needed was a womb to grow. The medieval church believed that all of humanity originated from Adam which means that we were all encased, a human chain, and this went well with the theory of preformation. The original sin means that it was not just Adam who was tempted to eat the forbidden fruit but that each one of us were part of the original sin, that we all bit into the forbidden fruit and we are born of sin. The preformation theory was a simple solution to a complex problem of creation and since religious beliefs were high, preformation was regarded to be on the lines of creation as described in Genesis. To think outside preformation would mean that there were two entities, the male and female and there exists a common code to understand these two different entities and create a life form. Alternate theories were complex and instead the thinking at that time was preformation and variations to it, but this would all change with time. 

The origin of species
Charles Darwin was born on February 12, 1809, into a family of prominent physicians. Initially, he pursued medicine but was unsettled by the distressing realities of medical practice. He then shifted to theology at Cambridge University but soon discovered his true passion—natural history. Under the mentorship of clergyman and botanist John Henslow, Darwin developed his skills in identifying and classifying plant and animal species. 

Two books greatly influenced Darwin’s thinking. The first, Natural Theology (1802) by William Paley, introduced the argument of design, comparing the complexity of the universe to that of a watch—suggesting that just as a watch requires a watchmaker, the intricate natural world must have a divine creator. The second, A Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy (1830) by Sir John Herschel, presented a different perspective. Herschel argued that science could reduce complexity into fundamental causes and effects. He distinguished between two key inquiries: the origin of life—an issue beyond the scope of natural philosophy—and evolution, which sought to explain how life changes over time. This latter question captivated Darwin. 

During Darwin’s time, natural history was largely pursued by monks and scholars who viewed it as a means of cataloging God’s creation rather than questioning its origins. However, Darwin was driven by a deeper curiosity: How did new species emerge? 

After graduating from Cambridge, Darwin was invited to join an expedition to South America aboard the HMS Beagle. He set sail on December 27, 1831, a journey that would profoundly reshape humanity’s understanding of life. The expedition provided Darwin with an opportunity to collect fossils, study diverse ecosystems, and observe patterns in nature that challenged conventional beliefs. 

One of the most significant stops was the Galápagos Islands in 1835. Darwin meticulously collected specimens, including various bird species such as finches, mockingbirds, and blackbirds. At the time, he did not realize the full implications of his findings, but his observations would later prove revolutionary. In his notes, he sketched a tree-like diagram, illustrating the idea that species branch out and diversify—a stark contrast to the prevailing belief that all life had been created in a single divine act. 

While still aboard the Beagle, Darwin began categorizing the birds he had collected. He noticed that mockingbirds from different islands displayed distinct variations. Upon returning to England in 1836, he continued analyzing his specimens and, with the help of ornithologist John Gould, confirmed that what he initially believed to be different bird species were variations of the same species that had adapted to their respective environments. 

This realization led Darwin to formulate the theory of natural selection—organisms with favorable traits were more likely to survive and reproduce, passing those traits to future generations. Over time, this process led to the emergence of new species. In 1859, Darwin published On the Origin of Species, outlining his theory of evolution. Contrary to the belief that humans were divinely created as a distinct entity, Darwin’s findings provided evidence that all species, including humans, evolved through natural processes. 

Darwin’s work laid the foundation for evolutionary biology, distinguishing it from the rigid laws of physics and establishing it as a field that explains life’s diversity through gradual changes over time. His theory directly challenged the idea of intelligent design proposed by William Paley, replacing it with a scientific framework grounded in observation and evidence. 

Darwin’s journey aboard the Beagle and his subsequent discoveries revolutionized science, forcing a reevaluation of long-held religious interpretations of creation. His work not only reshaped biology but also had profound implications for philosophy, anthropology, and our understanding of human origins. Evolutionary theory remains one of the most significant scientific contributions, continuing to influence research and our comprehension of the natural world. 

Gregor Mendel 
In October 1843, a young man named Gregor Mendel, the son of peasant farmers from Silesia, joined the Abbey of St. Augustine in Brno. The monks of the abbey, who valued science as much as religion, had relocated to a deteriorating structure after falling out of favor with Emperor Joseph II. Despite its condition, the abbey housed a beautiful garden and an extensive library with nearly ten thousand books on natural history, geology, and astronomy. 

Mendel was ordained as a priest on August 6, 1847, but his true calling lay in academics rather than pastoral duties. The responsibilities of visiting the sick and dying weighed heavily on him, leading the abbot to support his pursuit of a teaching career. However, becoming a certified teacher required passing a government examination, which Mendel attempted but failed. Realizing he needed formal education, he traveled to Vienna to study mathematics, physics, and plant physiology. He also trained in microscopy. After two years, he returned to Brno, retook the exam, but failed again. Accepting that certification was not his path, he turned to scientific experimentation instead. 

Mendel's fascination with gardening led him to study inheritance in pea plants. He observed that true-breeding plants passed distinct traits—such as height (tall or short) and flower color (purple or white)—to their offspring. He questioned how traits were transmitted across generations and began hybridization experiments. Initially, he considered using field mice, but the abbot disapproved of such studies. Thus, Mendel returned to working with plants. 

His experiments revealed that when he crossed tall and short plants, the offspring were always tall—contradicting the idea of trait blending. Similarly, round and wrinkled seeds produced only round seeds in the first generation. However, when he bred these hybrids together, the recessive traits—such as short plants or wrinkled seeds—reappeared in later generations in predictable ratios. Mendel concluded that traits are inherited as discrete units, with one variant (dominant) masking the other (recessive) in hybrids. Though he did not name them, he had effectively discovered genes. 

On February 8, 1865, Mendel presented his findings at the Natural Science Society in Brno. His paper was later published in the society’s annual proceedings and sent to scientific institutions in England and the United States. However, his work received little attention, cited only four times between 1866 and 1900. For decades, Mendel’s discoveries remained largely unnoticed, and his contributions to genetics were nearly forgotten. 

It was not until the early 20th century—long after his death—that Mendel’s principles of inheritance were rediscovered, forming the foundation of modern genetics. Today, he is recognized as the "Father of Genetics," and his work continues to influence the study of heredity and evolution. 

Eugenics 
In 1883, Francis Galton, a cousin of Charles Darwin and a staunch believer in natural selection, introduced a concept that would leave an indelible mark on human history—eugenics, or the idea of improving the human race by selective breeding. Inspired by Darwin’s The Origin of Species, Galton theorized that if nature could evolve the fittest and best-suited individuals, then humans could refine this process artificially. He published Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development, advocating for the deliberate selection of superior traits to create a stronger, more intelligent population. 

The study of heredity took a significant leap in 1900 when English biologist William Bateson encountered Gregor Mendel’s work on genetic inheritance. He recognized that genes could be manipulated similarly to how humans refine gold—selecting desirable traits and eliminating perceived flaws. While this discovery opened new avenues in genetics, it also laid the foundation for eugenics to be weaponized by governments for their own agendas. 

By 1912, a year after Galton’s death, eugenics gained momentum with the first International Eugenics Conference in London. Among the most striking presentations came from American and German delegates, whose proposals stunned and unsettled the audience. While America was the first to institutionalize eugenics policies, Germany soon followed, leading to catastrophic consequences. 

Eugenics is distinct from modern genetic engineering. While today’s genetic research reveals the immense complexity of DNA—showing that genes are interconnected in intricate ways—early eugenicists wrongly assumed that traits like intelligence and criminality were inherited in a simplistic manner. They believed undesirable characteristics could be eradicated by selective breeding, an idea that led to widespread human rights violations. 

In 1896, the state of Connecticut passed a law prohibiting people with epilepsy or intellectual disabilities from marrying. In 1902, Charles Davenport, a professor of zoology at the University of Chicago, sought funding from the Carnegie Institution to study heredity. By 1910, he established the Eugenics Record Office, backed by philanthropists such as E.H. Harriman and John Harvey Kellogg. The office’s research—based on biased assumptions rather than rigorous science—concluded that the so-called "unfit" were largely immigrants, the poor, and racial minorities. 

The United States soon implemented eugenics-driven sterilization programs targeting individuals deemed "unfit"—including epileptics, criminals, and the disabled. Thousands of forced sterilizations were carried out under these policies. One of the most infamous cases was that of Carrie Buck, a young woman institutionalized at the Virginia State Colony for the Feebleminded. In the 1927 Supreme Court case Buck v. Bell, the court ruled 8-1 in favor of sterilization, with Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes infamously stating, "Three generations of imbeciles are enough." 

Over the next few decades, more than 60,000 people were sterilized in the United States. This practice influenced Nazi Germany, where Adolf Hitler’s regime took eugenics to an extreme, leading to mass sterilizations, euthanasia programs, and ultimately, the Holocaust. What had begun as a supposed scientific effort to improve humanity became a justification for some of the worst atrocities in history. 

The horrors of eugenics serve as a grim reminder of how science can be misused when detached from ethics and human rights. Today, while genetic research has advanced significantly, society continues to grapple with ethical dilemmas in gene editing and reproductive technologies. 

As humans, we possess the unique gift of consciousness—the ability to reflect on our actions and their consequences. Whether one views consciousness as a product of evolution or a divine gift, it ultimately offers us a choice: to use our knowledge for the betterment of humanity or to repeat the mistakes of the past. The history of eugenics underscores the importance of ensuring that scientific advancements serve humanity rather than subjugate it. 
